JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: It's
Tax Day, and
that's sparking new calls for
President Donald
Trump to release his own tax
returns.
We dig into how transparent this
White House
is.
Then: British Prime Minister
Theresa May calls
for a snap election, as she
seeks more public
support to take Britain out of
the European
Union.
And a teacher in the Navajo
Nation schools
takes a very hands-on approach
to learning.
CLYDE MCBRIDE, Teacher, Kayenta
Unified School
District: In a math class, you
get the problem
wrong, you miss that question.
In my program, if you get that
math problem
wrong, that animal can die.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Voting is in the
news across
Europe today, starting with a
surprise announcement
from London.
British Prime Minister Theresa
May called
for an early election, in June,
instead of
waiting until 2020.
Speaking outside her official
residence, May
said she is asking to move up
the vote to
strengthen her hand in
negotiating Britain's
exit from the European Union.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: Division
in Westminster will risk our
ability to make
a success of Brexit, and it will
cause damaging
uncertainty and instability to
the country.
So we need a general election,
and we need
one now, because we have at this
moment a
one-off chance to get this done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
closer look
at the implications of May's
move later in
the program.
Police in France say they have
broken up an
imminent attack aimed at that
country's presidential
election.
They arrested two suspects today
in the port
city of Marseille, and recovered
guns and
explosives.
Prosecutors accuse the pair of
being Islamic
extremists.
The first round of voting in
France's presidential
race begins on Sunday.
In Turkey, the main opposition
party is formally
asking to annul Sunday's
referendum that expanded
the powers of President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan.
Hundreds of people waited
outside the electoral
board's headquarters today to
file petitions
against the vote.
They say accepting ballots
without an official
stamp was illegal.
Separately, the White House
defended President
Trump's congratulatory call to
Erdogan, arguing
that he is an ally in the fight
against terrorism.
Vice President Mike Pence moved
on from South
Korea to Japan today, and again
pressed the
U.S. case against North Korea.
In Tokyo, Mr. Pence said the
U.S. will not
relent until the Korean
Peninsula is free
of nuclear weapons.
And he told Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo
Abe that American support is
unwavering.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
We appreciate the challenging
times in which
the people of Japan live, with
increasing
provocations from across the Sea
of Japan.
And, as the president himself
would if he
was here, let me be clear to
you, Mr. Prime
Minister and to all of people in
Japan, we
are with you 100 percent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last week, the
White House
announced that a U.S. aircraft
carrier was
steaming toward Korean waters as
a deterrent.
Now it turns out that was
premature.
The New York Times reports that
the carrier
group was headed the opposite
way at the time,
before changing course.
The Pentagon blames a series of
miscommunications.
The U.S. military says it
intercepted two
Russian bombers in international
airspace
off Alaska on Monday.
Two U.S. fighter planes shadowed
them for
12 minutes.
According to FOX News, the
Russians came within
100 miles of Alaska's Kodiak
Island.
It is the first such incident in
nearly two
years.
The manhunt is over for the
suspect accused
of killing an elderly man in
Cleveland and
posting video of the crime on
Facebook.
State police in Pennsylvania
found Steve Stephens
today in the city of Erie.
He shot and killed himself after
a chase,
closing the case for authorities
back in Cleveland.
CALVIN WILLIAMS, Cleveland,
Ohio, Police Chief:
We are grateful that this has
ended.
We would have preferred that it
had not ended
this way, because there are a
lot of questions,
I'm sure, not only for the
family, but the
city in general, would have had
for Steve
as to why this transpired.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg
pledged today that the social
media giant
will do all it can to prevent
postings of
violent crimes in the future.
State officials in Arkansas are
vowing to
carry out a double execution
later this week,
that after the U.S. Supreme
Court halted the
state's plan to resume capital
punishment
for the first time in nearly 12
years.
The high court issued its ruling
late Monday,
just minutes before a condemned
man was scheduled
to die.
Secretary of Homeland Security
John Kelly
is taking on critics in Congress
over immigration
enforcement.
In Washington today, Kelly said
that too many
public officials ridicule
immigration agents
and airport security officers,
and accept
unfounded allegations about them
as truth.
JOHN KELLY, U.S. Homeland
Security Secretary:
If lawmakers do not like the
laws that we
enforce, that we are charged to
enforce, that
we are sworn to enforce, then
they should
have the courage and the skill
to change the
laws.
Otherwise, they should shut up
and support
the men and women on the front
lines.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than 21,000
undocumented
immigrants in the U.S. have been
arrested
since President Trump took
office.
That is up from 16,000 at this
point a year
ago.
Republicans faced another tough
race today
in what had been a solidly red
U.S. congressional
district.
The election was in suburban
Atlanta, where
18 candidates from both parties
competed.
The seat was vacated by Tom
Price, who is
now the secretary of health and
human services.
President Trump sharply
criticized the leading
Democrat in the race, Jon
Ossoff, who said
he thinks the president is --
quote -- "misinformed."
There is word this evening that
President
George H.W. Bush is hospitalized
again in
Houston.
A spokesman said Mr. Bush is
doing fine and
already on the path to going
home.
He gave no other details.
Mr. Bush is 92.
He was hospitalized for
pneumonia back in
January.
And on Wall Street, stocks lost
more ground
after Goldman Sachs and Johnson
& Johnson
posted disappointing earnings.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 113
points to close at 20523.
The Nasdaq fell seven, and the
S&P 500 slid
nearly seven.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
growing concerns
over White House ethics; the
president's efforts
to revamp a widely used guest
workers program;
pushback against Mr. Trump's
upcoming state
visit to Britain; and much more.
It's Tax Day, I'm sure you know,
and President
Trump is facing renewed
questions over public
disclosure issues that dogged
him on the campaign
trial.
Our John Yang begins our
coverage.
JOHN YANG: For President Trump,
questions
about transparency start with
his taxes, and
why he's breaking with tradition
and not releasing
his returns.
White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer:
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We're under the same audit that
has existed,
and so nothing has changed.
JOHN YANG: In fact, presidents
and vice presidents
are automatically audited by the
IRS, which
hasn't stopped other chief
executives from
making them public.
This weekend, thousands of
people marched
in cities around the country to
demand that
Mr. Trump release his taxes.
He dismissed them with a tweet:
"Someone should
look into who paid for the small
organized
rallies.
The election is over."
Mr. Trump is the first president
in more than
40 years not to make his tax
returns public.
The president says only
reporters care about
the issue.
But in a recent
Bloomberg/Morning Consult
poll, 53 percent of those
surveyed said the
president should release them.
Then there's the question of who
visits the
White House, which Mr. Trump
calls the people's
house.
The administration says it's
ending the Obama
policy of making visitor logs
available, with
exceptions for national security
and privacy
reasons.
Press Secretary Spicer:
SEAN SPICER: Frankly, the faux
attempt that
the Obama administration put
out, where they
would scrub who they didn't want
put out,
didn't serve anyone well.
JOHN YANG: The administration is
also under
scrutiny for hiring former
lobbyists to craft
policies for the industries they
came from.
The New York Times and
ProPublica found some
had been given secret waivers
exempting them
from ethics rules.
Ethics questions also extend to
first daughter
and White House adviser Ivanka
Trump and her
business interests.
The Associated Press reported
that she received
provisional Chinese approval for
three trademarks
on the day she dined with
president Xi Jinping
at Mr. Trump's Mar-a-Lago
resort.
Her fashion line, which is
seeing record sales,
is held in a family-run trust,
and she has
pledged to recuse herself from
issues that
present conflicts.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on some
of the questions
all of this raises about
government transparency
and conflicts of interest, we
are joined by
Richard Painter.
He's a University of Minnesota
law professor
who served as President George
W. Bush's top
ethics attorney.
And Noah Bookbinder, he's
executive director
of the government watchdog group
Citizens
for Responsibility and Ethics in
Washington.
We welcome both of you to the
program.
NOAH BOOKBINDER, Executive
Director, Citizens
for Responsibility and Ethics in
Washington:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
Noah Bookbinder, I'm going to
start with you.
There's so much to cover here.
Let's just pick out a few of
these questions.
Taxes.
The White House continues to
insist that President
Trump's taxes are being audited,
and there's
just no way he can release them,
he doesn't
have that ability to release
them.
What's the answer?
NOAH BOOKBINDER: That's just not
correct.
As the report just indicated,
every president's
taxes are routinely audited, and
yet all of
the previous presidents have
seen fit to release
their tax returns.
Richard Nixon released his tax
returns when
he was under audit.
And, surely, a level of
transparency that
was sufficient for Richard Nixon
ought to
work for this president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Painter,
why isn't
that a legitimate reason?
In addition, the White House
says the public
doesn't really care about
President Trump's
taxes.
RICHARD PAINTER, Former
Associate Counsel
to President George W. Bush:
Well, the public
does care, and the fact that the
tax returns
are under audit is not an excuse
for not releasing
the tax returns.
And, furthermore, the president
is going to
propose tax reform legislation,
which may
very well just mean more
handouts for the
super rich, billionaire tax
cuts.
We ought to at least know what
particular
tax provisions are benefiting
him financially,
which loopholes he's using,
before he starts
tinkering around with the tax
code to create
yet more.
So, this is going to be
critically important
that he release the tax returns,
or we're
not going to have any tax reform
legislation
get through Congress.
I can't imagine that Congress
would sign off
on a bill proposed by the
president if he's
not going to disclose how the
bill is going
to affect him financially.
And the only way to do that is
release those
tax returns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly
to Noah Bookbinder,
this has been Donald Trump's
argument throughout
the campaign from the very
beginning, the
first time anyone asked him
about releasing
his taxes.
He said, it's none of your
business.
It's my private business.
And, besides, they're being
audited.
Does he have a point that he is
in a special
place in this argument, unlike
anyone else?
NOAH BOOKBINDER: He really
doesn't.
It is -- his taxes will reveal
information
that is going to tell us how
he's affected,
as Richard said, by tax reform,
but also by
all kinds of other policy
issues, from foreign
policy -- his tax returns will
reveal his
foreign interests -- to
regulatory policy.
And so it's crucial for the
American people
to know what his interests are,
to know what
affects him and where conflicts
might be.
It's even more true for him than
for other
presidents, because he maintains
these vast
business interests worldwide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to turn
both of you
to another question that's been
in the news,
and that is releasing, making
public the list
of people who visit the White
House, the so-called
visitor logs.
Richard Painter, this White
House, they're
saying, we're not going to do
it, and, by
history, by tradition, most
presidents haven't
done it.
Yes, President Obama did, but
President Trump
doesn't feel compelled to do so.
What difference does it make?
RICHARD PAINTER: It makes a lot
of difference.
The most ordinary Americans
never have an
opportunity to visit with anyone
inside the
White House.
They can only look at the White
House from
outside the gate.
Very few people get in there,
lobbyists, billionaires,
friends of the president,
friends of his staff,
politically connected people.
We have the right to know who
those people
are.
They're going in there.
They're lobbying the White House
staff, trying
to get legislation through,
trying to get
regulatory loopholes, tax
loopholes and the
rest of it.
And the rest of us who don't
have any opportunity
to go in the White House have
the right to
at least know who is going in
and out of there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Noah Bookbinder,
your organization
actually sued the administration
of George
W. Bush to try to get them to
release these
visitor logs.
You weren't successful with him,
but then,
again, as we mentioned,
President Obama did
release his.
Where does that stand?
Is this the kind of lawsuit that
could apply
again?
NOAH BOOKBINDER: Sure.
Well, our organization sued
originally under
George W. Bush.
That lawsuit carried through
into President
Obama's administration, and it
was in discussions
that came out of that lawsuit
that led to
the Obama administration's
policy of releasing
the visitor logs.
They did it with exceptions for
national security
policy and for privacy, so there
were no problems
with doing so.
Countless news stories came out
of who was
in there, who was getting
access, who was
influencing policy from the
millions of names
that were released.
We have filed a similar suit now
with this
administration, because they're
not following
the example of the Obama
administration and
releasing those names.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so we will
see how long
that takes to work its way
through.
I now want to turn both of you,
though, to
something else that has cropped
up again today,
and that is the family conflicts
of interest.
We know, Richard Painter, that
both the president's
daughter Ivanka Trump, her
husband, Jared
Kushner, all have had very
successful business
interests.
They have separated themselves
by a measure
now that they're working in the
White House,
but they have not completely
separated themselves.
How do you see the decision they
have made
to create trusts or other legal
mechanisms
without completely selling off
and separating
themselves from their business
interests?
RICHARD PAINTER: Well, the
trusts don't do
anything to change ownership of
the businesses.
They still have ownership of
these businesses,
which include clothing import
businesses,
bring in clothes from China,
and, of course,
Jared Kushner's real estate
businesses.
So what this means is both of
them are going
to have to recuse from trade
negotiations
with China that affect the
clothing import
business that Ivanka has, and
both of them
are going to have to recuse from
tax reform
measures, because there are lots
of loopholes
for the real estate business in
any tax reform
bill, certainly a lot of real
estate-related
issues on the table in tax
reform, and, furthermore,
banking reform.
They have got to stay out of
that.
That affects real estate.
So, they have got to stay out of
those things,
and we will be OK.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I was in --
Noah Bookbinder,
I was in touch today with Ivanka
Trump's attorney,
Jamie Gorelick, here in
Washington, asked
her about this story today about
Ivanka Trump
winning trademarks in China just
on the same
day that she was meeting with
the Chinese
-- with her father, with the
Chinese premier.
Jamie Gorelick wrote back and
basically said
that Ivanka Trump removed
herself from her
business before the start of her
father's
administration.
She said she has no role in
deciding now what
trademarks it seeks.
She's going to follow all
applicable ethics
rules.
Why isn't that good enough?
NOAH BOOKBINDER: Well, the --
she is still
the owner of that business, and
because she
is the owner, she benefits from
trademarks
that are granted to the
business.
And so, if they apply for
trademarks, she
sees that they get them.
She knows the Chinese government
is doing
things that are beneficial to
her, and that's
going to make her more disposed
to policies
that benefit China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we are
going to
have to leave it there, as we
said, so many
questions in this.
And I know we're going to be
coming back to
it.
Noah Bookbinder, Richard
Painter, we thank
you both.
NOAH BOOKBINDER: Thank you so
much.
RICHARD PAINTER: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
today renewed
his call for U.S. agencies to --
quote -- "buy
American and hire American"
following a tour
of a tool-making plant in
Kenosha, Wisconsin
today.
Our William Brangham has the
story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: During his
Wisconsin visit,
the president signed an
executive order to
encourage federal agencies to
use more American
workers and products.
It also targeted what are known
as H-1B guest
worker visas, which the
president said hurt
those same workers.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Right now, H-1B visas are
awarded in a totally
random lottery, and that's
wrong.
Instead, they should be given to
the most
skilled and highest paid
applicants, and they
should never, ever be used to
replace Americans.
No one can compete with American
workers when
they are given a fair and level
playing field,
which has not happened for
decades.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The H-1B visa
system is
meant to help U.S. employers
find foreign
labor to fill highly technical
jobs they can't
fill with U.S. workers.
But critics, including the
president, say
the system is being abused.
We turn to two people who have
followed this
issue closely.
Daniel Costa is director of
immigration law
and policy research at the
Economic Policy
Institute, a nonpartisan think
tank here in
Washington, D.C.
And Vivek Wadhwa is a
distinguished fellow
and adjunct professor at
Carnegie Mellon University's
College of Engineering.
He teaches and writes on
technology and entrepreneurship.
Welcome to you both.
Daniel Costa, I would like to
start with you.
You heard the brief introduction
that I made
about these visas.
Explain, what is the intention
of the H-1B
visa?
DANIEL COSTA, Economic Policy
Institute: Well,
the program is usually sold by
the companies
that use it as a program to
bring in the best
and the brightest workers from
abroad and
also to be used when no
qualified U.S. workers
can be found.
And the reality is, though, that
that's not
what the law requires.
Employers are not required to
search for and
offer jobs to U.S. workers, and
they can also
pay much lower wages, based on
the way the
wage rules are set up in the
program.
And so that's sort of the main
-- the two
main things that are wrong with
the program,
and so the program doesn't have
a lot of credibility,
and some fixes are definitely
required.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Vivek Wadhwa,
the president
argues that there is a ready
supply of American
tech workers to fill these jobs
and that the
visa program is being abused.
What is your reaction to that?
VIVEK WADHWA, Carnegie Mellon
University:
There are people with some
skills, but the
type of skills that Silicon
Valley is looking
for are always in short supply
because technology
is changing so fast.
And immigration is the lifeblood
of Silicon
Valley.
You know, yes, there is some is
abuse, but
it is badly needed by Silicon
Valley for what
it does, which is to build these
amazing,
new, innovative product.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Daniel Costa,
what do you
respond to that?
Does this complement U.S.
workers or does
it replace the workers?
DANIEL COSTA: ®MD-BO / I think
that there's
no question that America needs
the best and
the brightest skilled immigrants
from abroad.
I don't think anybody is
debating that.
I think what is at issue here is
the terms
and conditions under which those
migrants
come to work in the United
States.
They're coming in a visa that
ties them to
their employers, so they're
quasi-indentured.
And they're able to be paid much
lower wages.
And so what you have is, the
program is set
up in a way that has four wage
levels, and
the two lowest wage levels are
below the local
average wage for the job, and 80
percent of
the H-1B jobs that are coming in
are coming
in at a wage that is lower than
the local
average wage.
And so what that means is that
either these
are the best and brightest
workers who are
coming in, and they're being
vastly underpaid,
or they're just entry-level
workers who are
coming in.
those lower level wages are
listed as the
entry-level wage.
So, that's the reality.
I think that prioritizing
higher-wage visas
or higher-skilled workers coming
in under
those visas, it won't lower the
number that
are coming in, and certainly
some companies
really need these workers.
But we should shift to a
higher-wage, higher-skill
work force that comes in on the
visas.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Vivek, what's
your reaction
to that?
If you're bringing workers in
from other lands,
and they are being paid less
than American
workers, there is a fundamental
fairness issue,
that many American workers,
including the
president, would say, that's not
right, we
shouldn't be doing that.
VIVEK WADHWA: Yes.
And I agree with that, by the
way.
I agree with what Daniel says.
And the problem is that this
visa ties the
worker to the employer, which is
where the
indentured servitude comes from.
So, when you're waiting for a
green card,
for which for Indians could take
10, 15 years,
you're basically locked into
that employer,
and the employer does pay
substandard wages
because the employer can get
away with it.
They have people who are locked
in.
A very simple solution.
Let's -- a very simple solution.
Let's decouple the employer from
the visa.
In other words, let the visa go
to the employee,
so that the employee can shift
jobs and go
to the highest-paid employer.
Why do we have to have them
linked up the
way they are?
If we did that, suddenly, the
market forces
would prevail, and it would fix
the problem
in one fell swoop, except we
don't talk about
it.
A lot of the attacks on the visa
are to stop
immigration altogether and to
cut off the
lifeline to Silicon Valley.
We need to have intelligent
conversations
and fix the real problem there
is, which is
tethering the employee to the
employer.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Would that be
a solution?
If the worker came in, and the
visa belonged
to them, and then, if they
didn't like the
pay they were getting at company
A, couldn't
they then just go and work for
company B?
DANIEL COSTA: ®MD-BO / That just
wouldn't
be enough to fix the way the
program is set
up.
There is a very easy, simple
solution that's
out there.
It's been proposed in bipartisan
legislation
by Senators Durbin and Grassley,
and all it
would simply do is require that
employers
recruit and hire U.S. workers
before hiring
an H-1B worker, and it would
require that
employers pay at least the local
average wage,
so eliminate the two lowest wage
levels.
And then it would also create a
prioritization
scheme for the lottery that
allocates the
visas.
However, the tech industry and
the corporate
lobbies have been strongly
against these basically
simple, commonsense solutions.
Just being able to switch to
another employer
is not going to fix a lot of the
problems.
It's something, and I think that
we should
move away from these
non-immigrant temporary
visa statuses, because they're
terrible for
workers, because they are tied
to employers.
It's the same issue with
low-skilled visas.
But workers need to be coming
in.
We need to be making sure that
there is an
actual labor shortage, an actual
need before
the worker comes in.
And then, once they come in, we
should be
putting them on a quick and easy
path to permanent
residency and a green card and
citizenship.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Vivek, what do
you think
of that?
There's a lot of proposals
there, but the
idea that...
VIVEK WADHWA: Too complex.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ... if a job
for a computer
engineer of a certain category
is $150,000
a year, that's what the
immigrant laborer
should be paid as well?
VIVEK WADHWA: I agree with that.
But if the employee is allowed
to change jobs
-- keep it simple.
If the employee can change jobs
like every
other American can right now,
the employer
would have to pay market wages.
The employer will select the
best person.
Why do we have to become
nationalistic and
saying you have to have white
skin or you
have to be born in America to
get a job with
an American company?
The majority of the income that
-- a lot of
American companies will say this
from abroad.
They market their goods
globally.
If we're now going to shut off
the rest of
the world, the rest of the world
will shut
us off and it will impact our
economy.
The simplest thing over here is
to untether
the visa from the employer and
let the free
market prevail.
This is what makes America
great, is the free
market.
Let's go back to that.
Let's not have more regulation
or more loopholes
that can be subverted, which is
what we were
talking about.
Simple.
Untether the two things, let the
free market
rule.
That's what I'm saying.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Daniel Costa,
Vivek Wadhwa, thank you both
very much for
being here.
DANIEL COSTA: ®MD-BO / Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, British
Prime Minister Theresa May
announced today
she would ask for elections to
be held this
June, instead of in 2020.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The prime
minister's request
for snap elections was made with
an eye towards
shoring up her negotiating
position, as the
United Kingdom heads into tough
talks over
the terms of its exit from the
European Union.
After repeatedly saying she
would not call
for clearly elections, it was a
move that
took many by surprise.
From London, we're joined by
Stephanie Baker,
a senior writer at Bloomberg.
Stephanie, first with that
surprise, how big
was it, or even shock for many
there, and
how was it taken?
STEPHANIE BAKER, Bloomberg: It
was a big shock,
and it was -- a lot of people
were surprised
it hadn't leaked out beforehand.
As you noted in your report,
she, Theresa
May, the prime minister, has
ruled out an
early election repeatedly over
the past few
months.
And people took her at her word.
So even members of her own party
were taken
aback by the decision.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, how fractured
is the political
debate there?
Was there a sense that she did
this because
she realized she needed a strong
mandate in
order to shore up her support
over Brexit?
STEPHANIE BAKER: Yes.
Her Conservative Party has a
slim 17-seat
majority in Parliament, and you
know, I think
she is taking a calculated bet
here.
She's taken a look at the polls,
which give
her Conservative Party a
20-point lead, and
she thinks she could increase
her majority
in Parliament by picking up
disaffected voters
from the opposition Labor Party,
particularly
those who supported Brexit in
the north, to
increase her majority, so that
when she goes
to Brussels to negotiate the
U.K.'s exit from
the E.U., she can come back with
a deal, and
not be attacked for any kind of
compromises
or, you know, negotiating
conclusions by the
hard anti-European wing of her
own party.
JEFFREY BROWN: And how big a
personal risk
is she taking?
I saw that opposition figures
were already
painting her as a kind of
opportunist trying
to take advantage of things
here.
STEPHANIE BAKER: Well, yes, I
mean, I think
she runs a personal risk of
undermining her
own credibility, since she did
say so many
times that she wouldn't hold an
early election,
that the country didn't need
another election,
that it would undermine
stability.
She does look like another
politician who
has gone back on her word, and I
think that
will play out during the
campaign over the
next seven weeks.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, one of the
big questions,
of course, is to what extent
this reopens
the whole question of Brexit.
How much will it be the subject
of debate
in this election?
STEPHANIE BAKER: I think that's
what a lot
of people are talking about now.
Traditionally, the U.K. has been
dominated
by the two main political
parties, the Conservatives
and the left-leaning Labor
Party.
The Labor Party is in a current
state of disarray.
It's led by a weak leader,
Jeremy Corbyn,
who is regarded as very un-prime
ministerial.
There is a third party called
the Liberal
Democrats who were part of a
governing coalition
between 2010 and 2015.
They have positioned themselves
as the party
of the remain vote, that is, the
48 percent
of British voters who backed
staying in the
E.U., and they are trying to
turn this election
into a kind of quasi-rerun of
the referendum.
Whether or not they will be able
to do that,
how many seats they will be able
to pick by
running that strategy is
unclear.
But, certainly, in areas like
London and the
South of England, which voted
overwhelmingly
for remain, they're likely to
pick up quite
a number of seats.
So it's hard to see how the
balance will change.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just briefly,
in 30 seconds
or so, Stephanie, Americans, of
course, are
used to endless, years-long
elections.
This is June 8, so it's very
quick.
STEPHANIE BAKER: It is.
It's seven weeks of campaigning.
Parties are going to have to be
writing their
election manifestos, getting
fund-raising
in place.
It will be incredibly quick.
It is not unexpected.
There were many people amongst
all of the
different parties who thought
that she would
call it.
The timing, of course, caught
many people
by surprise.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stephanie Baker
of Bloomberg
in London, thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, from the
prime minister's
surprise news of today, to a
surprise Theresa
May brought to the White House
in January,
and the debate it's sparked
across Great Britain.
From London, special
correspondent Ryan Chilcote
has this look.
RYAN CHILCOTE: It was supposed
to be a diplomatic
coup, the British prime minister
beating the
world's leaders to the Oval
Office.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I am honored to have Prime
Minister Theresa
May here for our first official
visit.
RYAN CHILCOTE: May didn't just
return the
favor.
She upped the ante, extending an
honor only
two U.S. presidents have
received since 1952.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: I have
today been able to convey Her
Majesty the
Queen's hope that President
Trump and the
first lady would pay a state
visit to the
United Kingdom later this year,
and I'm delighted
the president has accepted that
invitation.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Then, things got
awkward.
Three days later, 20,000
protesters gathered
outside the prime minister's
office to denounce
the travel ban President Trump
imposed just
hours after May left, then,
another day of
demonstrations, then another --
1.8 million
Brits signed a petition
demanding the prime
minister cancel the state visit.
If 10 of the last 12 American
presidents who'd
come weren't given the honor,
why should President
Trump?
Parliament gathered for a
debate.
PAULA SHERRIFF, Parliament
Member: Does he
agree that to use the expression
grab them
by the (EXPLETIVE DELETED)
describes a sexual
assault, and therefore suggests
that he shouldn't
be afforded a visit to our
queen?
RYAN CHILCOTE: At 82, Paul Flynn
is the senior
member of the House of Commons.
The debate in this country isn't
about whether
Donald Trump comes here.
It's been about whether he is
treated to a
state visit.
What's the big deal?
PAUL FLYNN, Parliament Member:
The big deal
is that only two American
presidents since
1952 have been given this
special honor of
a state visit.
And we're giving this unique
privilege to
Donald Trump after being in
office for seven
days.
It was an act of desperation by
a prime minister
that's in deep trouble.
We're losing our markets in
Europe because
of Brexit, and she's desperate
to ingratiate
herself with America in order to
try to win
new markets.
We don't want to give him
privileged treatment.
We want to show him our contempt
and disdain.
RYAN CHILCOTE: President Trump's
visit to
the U.K. has become politically
fraught.
Every aspect of the trip, from
the timing
to the itinerary, is in flux.
MAN: Barack Obama.
(APPLAUSE)
RYAN CHILCOTE: Six years ago,
President Trump's
predecessor was granted the
highest of honors
the opportunity to address
Parliament during
his state visit.
That was ruled out this time
around before
it could even be debated.
John Bercow is the speaker of
the House of
Commons.
JOHN BERCOW, Speaker, House of
Commons: Before
the imposition of the migrant
ban, I would
myself have been strongly
opposed to an address
by President Trump in
Westminster Hall.
After the imposition of the
migrant ban by
President Trump, I am even more
strongly opposed.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The state banquet
is a staple
of state visits, so that's in.
Protests are also a regular
feature.
A foray into the countryside
kept London's
protesters away from President
Bush in 2003
during his state visit.
This time, the planners are
looking at going
even further, to the north.
Scotland's an option.
Rural and remote, it's not a
likely place
for tens of thousands of
protesters to gather,
and yet, even here, not
everyone's a fan.
President Trump owns two golf
courses in Scotland,
including this one built on a
pristine patch
of 4,000-year-old sand dunes.
David Milne's house overlooks
the course and
the sea, or at least it did,
until he refused
to sell his property to
President Trump.
So, you used have a completely
unimpeded view
here.
DAVID MILNE, Scotland: Yes, we
had 40 miles
of uninterrupted coastline.
RYAN CHILCOTE: And now you have
got the fence.
DAVID MILNE: Yes, and Trump
provided the trees,
which, as you can see, are dying
slowly.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Milne has flown
two flags ever
since Trump visited Scotland
last year.
The one on top is Scotland's.
And what possessed you to put up
a Mexican
flag?
DAVID MILNE: Donald Trump had
recently made
the announcement that he was
going to build
a border wall and send the bill
to Mexico.
Well, he did basically the same
thing here
with a small fence, and he sent
me the bill.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Michael Forbes
wouldn't sell
either.
MICHAEL FORBES, Scotland: The
first thing
he said is was, what's this land
worth?
Twenty-five dollars an acre.
(EXPLETIVE DELETED) I said in
your (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) dreams.
(LAUGHTER)
MICHAEL FORBES: Yes, there will
be protesters,
all right.
RYAN CHILCOTE: If there's one
place in all
of the United Kingdom that can
provide security
and privacy during President
Trump's visit,
it's here at the queen's holiday
home in Scotland.
President Trump has reportedly
asked to play
golf on the queen's private
course at her
Scottish castle, Balmoral.
That would be a real honor.
The last president Queen
Elizabeth II met
at her private home was Dwight
Eisenhower
in 1959.
NARRATOR: He went to Balmoral to
stay with
the royal family, remember?
RYAN CHILCOTE: According to one
poll, close
to half of the British public
supports the
idea of a state visit.
There is also support for the
president, himself,
though in all of the
parliamentary debate,
this was the closest anyone got
to it.
NIGEL EVANS, Member of
Parliament: I would
like to respect the fact that he
stood on
a platform which is he is now
delivering.
He's going to go down in history
as being
roundly condemned for being the
only politician
to deliver on his promises.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Most who back the
visit, though,
do so despite the president's
policies.
That's a selfie that Hillary
took up in Derry,
New Hampshire, in January last
year.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Sir Simon Burns
traveled to
the U.S. to campaign on behalf
of Hillary
Clinton.
He is a conservative member of
Parliament
who supports the state visit.
SIR SIMON BURNS, Member of
Parliament: We
stand by America.
America stands by us.
It's in our national interest.
And regardless of who's
president, we have
got to get on with the United
States.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Fellow member of
Parliament
Bob Neill says the visit should
be looked
at in perspective.
BOB NEILL, Member of Parliament:
We have had
out-and-out dictators like
Nicolae Ceausescu
and Robert Mugabe come over in
the past.
And, whatever my personal
distaste for Mr.
Trump's style and policies in
some areas,
he's a democratically elected
politician.
RYAN CHILCOTE: President Trump
and Prime Minister
May have agreed to postpone the
visit until
October to give British
protesters a chance
to cool off.
Reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Ryan
Chilcote in London.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fallout from
Sunday's referendum
vote in Turkey continued today,
with critics
of President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan calling
for the results to be annulled.
That is just one of a series of
important
issues being dealt with by the
Senate Foreign
Relations Committee.
I spoke just a short while ago
with its ranking
member, Democratic Senator Ben
Cardin of Maryland.
I began by asking him if he was
concerned
by President Trump's call last
night to President
Erdogan to congratulate him on
his apparent
victory.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN (D), Maryland: Well,
Turkey is
a very vibrant democracy, and
it's, of course,
one of our NATO allies.
They had a referendum.
The referendum, according to
local officials,
did pass.
We are certainly concerned about
some of the
powers that are being
consolidated by Mr.
Erdogan, and about the checks
and balances
in their own system.
There's also been questions
raised as to the
legitimacy of some of the votes
that were
cast.
So, there are still issues that
I think need
to be addressed by Turkey.
As far as President Trump
calling President
Erdogan, that's a personal
decision he made.
I think it's important to
recognize this is
an important ally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so you are
watching the
way ballots were cast?
I ask because European observers
are saying
that some 2.5 million ballots
may have been
cast fraudulently.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: Yes, I'm very
concerned about
that.
There's been some legitimate
concerns raised
about some of the techniques
that were used
and the way the election was
conducted.
So we are concerned.
It was a close election.
It was not a -- it was a pretty
close call
between the two.
The amount of resources that
were made available
were certainly not equal on both
sides.
There are some questions on some
of the processes
that -- procedures that were
used.
So, yes, we are concerned.
And we hope that the Erdogan
government will
have a complete independent
investigation
on how the elections itself were
conducted.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn you
to North Korea.
As you know, tensions have been
raised significantly
just in the last few days.
The rhetoric, both from the
United States,
from the Trump administration,
and from the
North Koreans, has gotten
hotter.
This administration is saying
what they call
the era of strategic patience is
over.
Last night on this program, I
interviewed
the former Defense Secretary
William Perry,
who said he's alarmed by the
state of relations
between our two countries.
Where do you stand?
How concerned are you?
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: Well, I'm very, very
concerned.
Clearly, the young leader of
North Korea is
a very dangerous person.
We're not sure how he makes
decisions.
We have seen what he does to
people who oppose
him, including members of his
own family.
He's not a stable leader.
Now is the time for the United
States to exercise
some very mature international
leadership
to try to calm things down on
the Korean Peninsula,
and to change the calculation
for North Korea,
so that it's -- they recognize
it's in their
interests to negotiate the end
of the nuclear
weapon program.
That requires China to be much
more aggressive
in isolating North Korea with
the sanctions
that have been imposed, so that
we can really
make it clear to North Korea
that their only
path forward is to negotiate
with the international
community.
That requires strong, mature
U.S. leadership.
We need a game plan that can
accomplish those
types of objectives on the
Korean Peninsula.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you seeing
that game plan
from this administration?
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: No, I'm not -- I'm
not clear what
the administration's policy is.
They haven't really shared that
with Congress.
I'm not sure they have a
comprehensive policy
for the Korean Peninsula.
We want to make sure that North
Korea doesn't
possess the ability to use
nuclear weapons,
particularly to be able to
deliver those nuclear
weapons through the missiles
that they are
testing, and that we want to
make sure also
that North Korea is more in
harmony with the
international community in the
way they treat
its own people.
So, and, obviously, we're
concerned about
the security of South Korea.
So, there's a lot of interest
that the United
States has on the Korean
Peninsula.
And we haven't seen an
articulated, coordinated
policy from this administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're moving
around the world.
There's so much to ask you
about, Senator,
but I also want to speak to you
about Russia.
Besides Russian meddling in U.S.
elections,
there's now growing concern
about Russian
involvement in upcoming
elections in France
and in Germany.
You are the sponsor, along with
others, a
bipartisan bill in the Senate to
impose sanctions
on Russia for cyber-activity.
That was -- that legislation was
introduced
months ago.
The Russians are still doing
this.
Do they -- what's your sense of
how seriously
they take any sort of
retaliation or action
by the U.S.?
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: Well, we do know
that the sanctions
that were led by the United
States, and which
Europe has joined us, has had a
major impact
on the Russian economy.
So, we believe sanctions can be
very effective
in changing the equation for
Russia and what
they're doing, not just in
meddling in our
elections or meddling in
European elections,
but what they're doing in
Ukraine and the
annexation of Crimea -- there's
still engagement
on the eastern part of Ukraine
-- and the
manner in which they are
supporting the Assad
regime in Syria committing war
crimes.
All those behaviors by Russia,
we believe,
need to change, and we believe
sanctions can
be a major part of that.
So, yes, we want to enhance
those sanctions
to make them stronger.
We have a strong bipartisan
group, 10 Democrats,
10 Republicans, that have joined
in this legislation.
We do know that Russia meddled
in our election.
We know that.
We know that they meddled in the
Montenegro
election.
We know that and caused
violence.
We know that they're very active
today in
France and in Germany trying to
impact that
election, not only impact the
integrity of
the election, but also the
results, to get
a more pro-Russian leader --
leaders in Europe.
That is totally unacceptable,
and we need
to be united with our European
allies to prevent
that from happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is the Trump
administration
supporting that legislation?
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: Well, I really have
not had much
communication with the Trump
administration
in regards to Russian policy.
There are major players yet to
be named that
-- from the administration that
will require
Senate confirmation.
So we're still awaiting their
full team to
be in place.
In my conversations with Mr.
Tillerson, I
have made it very clear.
I think he's made it clear in
recent weeks.
So, we're trying to give the
administration
more tools it can use for an
effective policy
against Russia's aggressive
actions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Ben
Cardin, the ranking
Democrat on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee,
thank you very much.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a classroom
innovation
called career and technical
education, a hands-on
learning method for high school
students.
It is seen as a practical
approach for both
those headed to college and for
those who
are not.
And in the Navajo Nation in
Arizona, it's
making a difference.
PBS special correspondent Lisa
Stark of our
partner Education Week brings us
this story
as part of our weekly segment
Making the Grade.
LISA STARK: This is a
one-of-a-kind classroom,
with a one-of-a-kind educator,
Clyde McBride.
CLYDE MCBRIDE, Teacher, Kayenta
Unified School
District: My philosophy is a kid
don't learn
unless they get a little dirty.
LISA STARK: So, in Clyde
McBride's classes
in Navajo Nation in Northeastern
Arizona,
students jump right in.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: You never hold
with your hands.
You hold with your forearm.
STUDENT: The McBrides tell us,
you know, go
in there.
You're not going to learn
anything if you
just kind of stand back and just
watch anything.
LISA STARK: This is hands-on
instruction in
veterinary science, part
classroom, part veterinary
clinic.
Students work and observe in two
operating
rooms, one for small animals,
the other for
large.
They conduct exams and
vaccinations in a
state-of-the-art
$2.4 million facility, part of
Monument Valley
High School in Kayenta, Arizona,
and its career
and technical education program;
180 students,
more than a quarter of the high
school, have
signed up for this program,
where abstract
concepts meet the real world.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: Before they go to
surgery,
ketamine puts them to sleep.
It is an anesthesia.
And it's calculated by the
millimeter per
pound.
In a math class, you get the
problem wrong,
you miss that question.
In my program, if you get that
math problem
wrong, that animal can die.
LISA STARK: McBride grew up
around animals
on a ranch in Arizona.
He lost his father at age 16 and
figured he'd
forgo college to stay home and
take care of
the cattle.
His mother had other ideas.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: I will never
forget going home
one day and she says: "We're
going to sign
papers.
I just sold the ranch.
You have got to go to college."
LISA STARK: He became a teacher
and, longing
for a rural district, jumped at
the job in
Kayenta.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: When I came up
here, some of
my peer teachers were like, why
go to the
reservation?
That's going to be the worst
place that you
ever go to.
Our school is 98 percent on the
free and reduced
lunch program.
A lot of our communities are
very, very poor.
LISA STARK: But that hasn't
slowed McBride,
or stopped him from dreaming
big.
ELISSA MCBRIDE, Teacher: When
Mr. McBride
and I first started dating, we
would go out
to eat dinner and he would draw
on napkins
his vision of the agro-science
center.
And I would tell him all the
time, you're
crazy.
People don't invest money like
this in education,
especially in Native American
children.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: I wouldn't accept
no as an
answer.
LISA STARK: It took decades to
turn his dream
into a reality.
A new superintendent found the
funding, and
students helped with the design.
The Ag Center opened its doors
opened in 2011.
This program prepares students
for careers
and college and much more.
DR.
SUZANNE SMITH, Veterinarian:
It's to get the
community and the kids and the
students and
their parents involved in a
better lifestyle
and better health for
themselves, for their
animals, and making better
career choices
and making better life choices.
LISA STARK: And it's working.
Students in the veterinary
science program
do better than the state average
on math and
English tests; 100 percent of
them graduate
high school, and three-quarters
of them go
on to college or training
programs.
The rest go on to a job, numbers
that would
be impressive anywhere, but
especially for
Native American students, who
post the lowest
graduation rates of any racial
or ethnic group.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: We ignite the
fire.
We give them that passion.
We give them that leadership.
And then whatever route they
want to choose,
then we support that route.
PRESHES PARRISH-BEGAY, Student:
They made
sure I didn't fall off track.
They made sure I didn't -- I
didn't do anything
to ruin my chances of going
somewhere.
SHELIA YENCHICK, Student: I
didn't really
have that much motivation from
my parents,
but here, the kids, they really
have a lot
of that from the teachers and
the community.
They really help them a lot, and
then they
reach their goals.
LISA STARK: The program has
enriched the students
and their community.
With the nearest vet hours away,
this is the
go-to clinic for the animals and
livestock
families here depend on.
Animals are considered a sacred
part of the
Navajo culture.
MYRON HUDSON, Student: In my
culture, it's
like, if you take care of the
animals, they
take care of you.
LISA STARK: McBride's goal is to
launch his
students on to college or good
jobs.
Many hope to come back to serve
their community.
CLYDE MCBRIDE: The Navajo
belief, and really
the way I was raised, is you
want to leave
this world better than you found
it.
And I can tell you that that's
what I took
into this program.
And when I leave Kayenta some
day, it's going
to be better off than when I
came.
LISA STARK: I'm Lisa Stark of
Education Week
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, in our
"NewsHour" Shares
moment of the day: that sure
sign of spring,
tulips.
And no one knows them better
than the Dutch.
This year, the Royal Netherlands
Embassy in
Washington displayed some 10,000
at the ambassador's
residence.
We took a tour with Caroline
Feitel from the
embassy.
CAROLINE FEITEL, Royal
Netherlands Embassy:
Our ambassador decided that,
this year, he
would like to do a spring event
where we show
off one of our biggest export
products.
So, we decided to do a tulip
event to celebrate
spring.
We have over 10,000 tulips here,
and I would
say about 100 different
varieties.
The Netherlands, we're the
second largest
exporter of agricultural
products in the world.
We export about two billion cut
tulips every
year.
And we export to the United
States over a
billion bulbs, which half are
tulip bulbs.
Of course, we're also very much
known for
Keukenhof, which has hundreds of
millions
of tulips during spring.
And it's endless.
It's like a carpet of tulips
that you see,
and it is very impressive.
And a lot of Dutch people, but
also a lot
of tourists come to the
Netherlands and want
to see that.
So, it's a unique moment in the
Netherlands
every year in about mid-April.
In the 16th century, there was a
lot of tulip
bulb speculation, and one bulb
could be the
value of a house in Amsterdam.
So, it's seen as the first
bubble speculation,
you know, commercial bubble in
the world.
Every tulip you see comes from
one bulb that
was created by the grower, and
then had to
be multiplied.
So the one bulb became four, and
the four
becomes 12.
And so that's why, when you have
a new variety
of tulip, it takes quite a while
before you
have the huge quantity to be
able to sell
it commercially.
They come in a huge variety of
colors.
You have parrot ones that have
the multiple
colors.
You have doubles.
You know, it's almost like three
tulips in
one.
Black doesn't exist.
And then blue doesn't exist
either.
The closest you can get is a
deep purple.
So, we played a little trick.
So, we have a blue tulip here
today that was
colored.
It's originally a white tulip.
And the way it's colored, it's
put in blue
water, and then it becomes a
beautiful blue.
Tulips, they are definitely the
springtime
flower that you see around.
And I think it brings people
happiness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, on most
PBS stations,
"Frontline" presents "The Last
Days of Solitary,"
following five inmates over
three years in
the Maine state prison system.
In this clip, a confined inmate
talks about
his violent tendencies.
MAN: Never hurt anybody that I
felt that didn't
deserve it.
Staff members, any staff member
I ever put
my hands on, I didn't stab any
of them.
Had multiple opportunities to.
I have not done that.
When I was done, I walked up to
the desk.
The female that was on had her
back to me.
I threw the two shanks on the
desk, and I
told her, I said, I'm not here
to hurt you.
I held my hands up like this.
I go, I'm going to turn around,
put my hands
behind my back.
Cuff me.
I turned around, put my hands
behind my back.
She froze up.
I think she was kind of a little
in shock,
just didn't know what the hell
was going on.
She was like, is that your
blood?
Is that somebody's blood?
Is that yours?
I said, hello.
Don't ask no questions.
Just cuff me up.
Call your code.
Am I a violent inmate?
I can be, yes.
You put me in certain
situations, I am going
to be like that.
That's not no secret, though.
Anybody knows that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: For Tax Day, this writer
says the current
U.S. tax code should be scrapped
and completely
rewritten.
Last week, we profiled T.R.
Reid and his new book, "A Fine
Mess."
You can now read an excerpt from
that book
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday: a preview of
Saturday's worldwide
march in support of scientific
research.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.